According to Naeem (2019), one of the purposes of this literature review is to act as the basis for providing theoretical and methodological frameworks. It provides a background of IoT and its application in smart homes and cities. 

 

IoT 

Madakam, Ramaswamy, and Tripathi (2015) defined IoT as an open and comprehensive network of intelligent objects that have the capacity to auto-organize and share information, data, and resources, reacting and acting in face of situations and changes in the environment. Kumar, Tiwari, and Zymbler (2019) state that various important IoT projects have taken charge over the market in the last few years. A study shows that the American continent is contributing more to the health care and smart supply chain projects whereas contribution of the European continent is more to the smart city projects (Kumar, Tiwari & Zymbler, 2019).  This study is significant because it studies smart city projects as applications of IoT that Europe is contributing more to. 

 

Application in Smart Cities 

Mukhopadhyay and Suryadevara (2023) defined that in the context of smart cities, IoT sensors can be used to collect data on everything from air quality to traffic patterns to water usage.  Mukhopadhyay and Suryadevara went further to state that these data can then be analyzed to identify trends and patterns and make more informed decisions about resource allocation. According to research by Andrić, Vrsalovi´c, Perkovi´c, Agli´cˇCuvi´c and P.ˇSoli´c (2022), IoT used in underground water-meters were installed in a university building to track water consumption in three building blocks. Andrić and others also state that in future work, it is possible to apply machine learning technology to broaden perceptions of consumption trends and forecast future consumption and planned maintenance to avoid costly repairs or downtime in the system later. With the help of available data, savings concepts can be developed, and sustainable measures implemented (Andrić, et al., 2022). 

 

Application in Smart Homes 

Mukhopadhyay and Suryadevara (2023) claimed that sensors can be used to monitor energy consumption, temperature, and humidity levels, as well as the presence of people and pets in the home. Mukhopadhyay and Suryadevara went further to state that these data can be used to automate various aspects of the home, such as turning off lights and heating when no one is home. A study explored the usage and impact of the IoT-based Smart Home Technology (IoT-SHT) in Malaysia. Interviews that were conducted uncovered six uses of IoT-SHT (Rock, Tajudeen & Chung, 2022). One of its uses was home automation. Rock and others noted that home automation is different from remote controls because home automation is activated by computerized algorithms or programmed routines while remote controls were initialized by humans. The IoT has emerged to be a part of people’s everyday life in today's digital era. It also serves as one of the drivers for the fourth industrial revolution; it has influenced every aspect of human life. Due to its enormous benefits to humankind, the IoT-SHT should be the focus of all researchers (Rock et al., 2022).
